---
layout: page
sidebar: right
subheadline: Notebook
title:  "Introduction to Tikhonov Regularization Method"
teaser: "First Steps with Regularization"
breadcrumb: true
tags:
    - [Regularization, Inverse Problem]
categories:
    - science-blog
header:
    title: Regularization
    pattern: pattern_jquery-dark-grey-tile.png
---

> Very short comment on Tikhonov regularization

[^1]: Doicu, Adrian, Thomas Trautmann, and Franz Schreier. Numerical regularization for atmospheric inverse problems. Springer, 2010.

## Tikhonov regularization method

This method is widely used to resolve discrete ill-posed inverse linear problems
(also non-linear). The problem it is usually establish as,

$$
y=F(x)
$$

where F(x) is a linear operator, therefore we may write,

$$
y=Kx
$$

The solution of the inverse discrete problem its usually described with the singular value decomposition (SVD). Then it is defined the pseudoinverse of K as,

$$
K^{\dagger}=(K^{T}K)^{-1}K^{T}=V\Sigma^{\dagger}U^{T}
$$

The Tikhonov regularization propose another definition of the pseudoinverse which includes a regularization matrix $$L$$
and a regularization parameter $$\alpha$$,

$$
K^{\dagger}=(K^{T}K+\alpha L^{T}L)^{-1}K^{T}=\bar{V}\Sigma^{\dagger}_{\alpha}\bar{U}^{T}
$$

In order to write the last equation the generalized singular value decomposition (GSVD) is used.

### Measurements with noise[^1]

The inversion method has an additional difficulty when the measurements incorporate errors, usually modelled as Gaussian Errors. In that case the vector state solution, written as $$x^{\epsilon}$$ is related with the noisy measurements $$y^{\epsilon}$$. The problem is formulated now as:

$$
y^{\epsilon}=Kx^{\epsilon}
$$

and the additional problem is not just how to calculate the singular values, but how different are the estimation $$x^{\epsilon}$$ and the true value $$x$$. 

However also there is a methodological problem on the definition of the solution $$x^{\epsilon}$$ given that is not true that always $$y^{\delta}\in Im(K)$$. Therefore, a new concept of solution is needed and it is usually formulated as an optimization rule:

$$
x^{\epsilon}: ||y^{\epsilon}-Kx^{\epsilon}||\le||y^{\epsilon}-Kx||\,\,\, \forall x \in \mathcal{X}
$$

where $$\mathcal{X}$$ is the domain of the Forward Model.
